DDA-GTN: large-scale drug repurposing on drug-gene-disease heterogenous association networks using graph transformers
==

In this work, we first present a benchmark dataset that includes three entities: drugs, genes, and diseases that form a three-layer heterogeneous network, and introduce Graph Transformers Networks to learn the low-dimensional embedded representations of drugs-diseases in the heterogeneous network as a way to predict drug-disease associations. We named this method DDA-GTN.

# 1.Platform and Dependency

## 1.1 Platform

- ubuntu 18.04

- RTX 3090(24GB)

## 1.2 Dependency

| Requirements      | Release                                |
| --------- | ----------------------------------- |
| CUDA     | 11.3                     |
| Python     | 3.9.13                     |
| torch     | 1.11.0                     |
| torch_geometric     | 2.1.0.post1                     |
| torch-scatter     | 1.6.0                     |
| torch-sparse     | 0.6.15                     |
| torch-cluster     | 1.6.0                     |
| pandas     | 1.4.4                     |
| scikit-learn     | 1.1.2                     |
| matplotlib     | 3.6.0                     |

# 2. Project Catalog Structure

## 2.1 src

> This folder stores the code files.

## 2.2 result

> This folder contains the logs of the five five-fold cross-validations, the model parameters and predictions of the fifth cross-validation, the code for calculating the results and standard deviation of the average five cross-validations, and the code for drawing the AUC and ROC curves.

## 2.3 compare

> This file contains the running code for LAGCN, LHGCE, and REDDA, which were originally sourced from the github repositories published by the corresponding publications.

# 3. Workflow

## 3.1 Configuration environment

```
pip install -r request.txt
```

## 3.2 Download Mdataset

Mdataset is the benchmarking dataset of DDA-GTN. It can be downloaded from [Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/records/10827427).

Put the dataset directory under the root directory of this project. Your project should look like this:

```
/DDA-GTN
  |-Data
  |-src
  |-result
  |-compare
```

### Data directory preparation

The data is in zenodo, which contains the input data for Mdataset's 5 cross validation on DDA-GTN.

The Data folder in zenodo should be stored side by side with the src folder.

| Folder name      | Descriptions                                |
| --------- | ----------------------------------- |
| C_D.csv     | drug-disease association <br>  CTD IDs -- MeSH IDs                     |
| C_G.csv     | drug-gene association <br>  CTD IDs -- Gene Symbol                     |
| G_D.csv     | gene-disease association <br>  Gene Symbol -- MeSH IDs -- InferenceScore                    |
| disease_feature.csv     | disease feature matrix 2447*881 matrices                     |
| drug_feature.csv     | drug feature matrix 5973*881 matrices                     |
| gene_feature.csv     | gene feature matrix 12582*881 matrices                     |
| A_CD.csv     | drug-disease association matrix  5973*2447 matrices, 5973 represents the number of drug categories, 2447 represents the number of disease categories|
| node_list.csv     | It contains all the nodes in the heterogeneous network in the order of drug(CTD IDs), gene(Gene Symbol), and disease(MeSH IDs), and the positions corresponding to the nodes are the indexes that end up in the sparse matrix                    |
| NegativeSample.csv     | Randomly select as many negative samples as positive samples from the drug-disease association matrix <br> drug index -- disease index |

## 3.3 Negtivesample

> python src/negativesample.ipynb

## 3.4 Split dataset

> python src/split.py seed **

> To run this code you need to set the random seed and the save path, the path needs to be created manually before you run it

## 3.5 Generate disease feature

> python src/feature_ge_Cycle.py

> This file contains a loop to generate five five-fold cross-validated disease feature.The generated files will be stored in the feature0{i} folder. feature0{i} is a folder name that can be set when running the code, it can be changed to another name.

> Setting the five folder paths to be read in, the path to read in needs to be the same as the path to save the file generated by src/split.py

## 3.6 Cross Validation and Prediction

The data for the above three steps of Mdataset has been provided in the Data folder, so you can execute this code directly.

### 3.6.1 Cross Validation

> python src/MdataNW_5cross.py

> This will save models and logs in saving_path/models and saving_path/log.txt, respectively.

> Need to set up paths to read in datasets and disease characteristics

> The path to read in the 5 cross-validation data needs to be the same as the path to the file generated by split.py

> The path to read in the disease signature data needs to be the same as the path to the file generated by feature_ge_Cycle.py

#### Optional parameters

- epoch: Default=100. The number of training epoch.

- lr: Default=0.005. The initial learning rate.

- weight_decay: Default=5e-4. The weight decay for this training.

- node_dim: Default=128. The dim for node feature matrix.

### 3.6.2 Prediction

All results are deposited in Zenodo for reproducing purpose. The raw logs can also be found in [Zenodo](https://zenodo.org/records/10827427).

> python src/casestudy_Mdata.py

> This will save models and logs in saving_path/models and saving_path/log.txt, respectively.


## Figures in this study


### Figure3

Figure3(a) Data from log.txt generated by src/MdataNW_5cross.py, using calculateLog.py calculate the averaging and standard deviation for each metric in the five log.txt

Figure3(b) generated by result/draw_ROC.py

Figure3(c) generated by result/draw_aupr.py

### Figure4

Figure 4 plotted using excel, the data sources are detailed in the corresponding excel.

Figure 4(a) (c) Data saved in result/Figure4_a_c.xlsx

Figure 4(b) Data saved in result/Figure4_b.xlsx

Figure 4(d) Data saved in result/Figure4_d.xlsx



### Figure5

Figure 5 plotted using excel, the data sources are detailed in the corresponding excel.

Figure 5 Data saved in result/Figure5.xlsb

### Figure7

Figure7(a) Data from log.txt generated by src/MdataNW_5cross.py, using calculateLog.py calculate the averaging and standard deviation for each metric in the five log.txt

Figure7(b) generated by draw_ROC.py

Figure7(c) generated by draw_aupr.py

# Citation

**Rui Sun**, De-Min Liang, Pu-Feng Du<sup>*</sup>. DDA-GTN: large-scale drug repurposing on drug-gene-disease heterogenous association networks using graph transformers (2024 Submitted)
